Patient safety and the effect of health information technology

Abstract
Health information technology has advanced and been used quickly since the initial Institute of Medicine (IOM) study was released. Unfortunately, the impact of health information technology on patient safety is not well supported by scientific research. The goal of this article is to review the most recent scientific data regarding how various health information technologies can enhance patient safety results. The results indicate that health information technology can improve practise guidelines' adherence and patient safety by lowering prescription mistakes and adverse drug responses. The authors draw the conclusion that health information technology is an important instrument for raising the standard and safety of medical care. Yet, given that some technologies have scant proof of enhancing patient safety outcomes, healthcare companies must carefully select which technologies to invest in.

Introduction 
To deliver safe care and prevent unfavourable outcomes is the aim of healthcare. The use of technology has been suggested as a way to decrease medical mistakes and enhance patient safety. The use of computers and software to handle, save, and share healthcare information is known as health information technology (HIT). HIT has numerous chances for healthcare improvement, including lowering errors, raising clinical results, and monitoring data over time. There has been a surge in the creation and use of HIT since the Institute's publication. This review seeks to provide a concise summary of the scientific data regarding the effects of various HIT on enhancing patient safety outcomes. Studies addressing interventions such bar code medication administration, clinical decision assistance, and electronic medical records are included in the review. Patient safety, medical mistakes, adverse events, and mortality were the main outcomes of interest. The review took into account randomised clinical trials, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses. The studies' methodological validity and bias risk were evaluated using the Cochrane technique. Clinicians and healthcare policy makers can utilise the review's findings to inform their decisions about purchasing and implementing HIT to increase patient safety.

Proposed Method
The effects of electronic medical records on patient safety and healthcare quality have been the subject of numerous research. While many studies have found beneficial findings, some have also revealed negative repercussions, sparking debate. Using data from 47 research, Campanella et al. did a sizable meta-analysis and found that electronic medical records have a beneficial effect on patient safety and healthcare quality. According to the meta-analysis, using electronic health records increased guideline adherence by 30%, decreased medication mistakes by 54%, and decreased adverse drug reactions by 36%. The study, however, found no effect on total mortality.Clinical decision support systems and computerised physician order entry have been found to be the most helpful health information technologies for enhancing patient safety, with the effects of other technologies like smart pumps, electronic sign-out and hand-off tools, and bar-code medication administration being less clear. Electronic medical data have been shown to increase patient safety overall by lowering medical errors.